# Identifying Essential QUestions and Understandings  
## Topics & Big Ideas  
Special Topics in Bioinformatics  
## What essential questions does this raise?   
**What do you want your students to come to understand specifically?** 
- How is a special topic different from a methodology?  
- How does bioinformatics utilize software development?  
- What is the role of biology in bioinformatics? Does it simply generate data?  
- What is NGS and how has it shaped bioinformatics?  
	- Are the subtopics in bioinformatics isolated specialties?  
- How do bioinformatics topics interact with a typical sequencing pipeline?  
- If NGS approaches did not exist, how would that have impacted the subtopics that dominate bioinformatics research?  

### Essential Questions  
- What is bioinformatics? What is it not?  
	- Do biological questions drive bioinformatics? Or do technical artefacts drive bioinformatics? Or neither?  
- How do / what biological factors lead to special topics in bioinformatics?  
	- How do we assess whether bioinformatics has answered a biological problem?  

(Added online)  
1) Identify the difference between a bioinformatics specialty and a set of computational algorithms  
2) Identify and explain key computational methods for sequence assembly and analysis  
3) Explain the biological relevance and relative merits of data types generated by 1st and 2nd generation sequencing platforms  
4) Describe a bioinformatics based analytical pipeline, integrating key fields and methods  


### Essential Understandings  
- The development of a sequencing and NGS analysis pipeline is core to all bioinformatics topics   
- Biological experiments and computational algorithms can both influence the output of any bioinformatics project  

# Big Ideas Manifested   
## Concepts  
- DNA isolation and sequencing  
- short-read vs long-read sequencing   
- Assembly    
- Reference genomes  
- Variant analysis  
- In vivo experiments for biological concepts  
- Data visualization and interpretation  
## Themes  
- Understanding disease complexity using computational methods  
	- Persoanlized medicine  
	- Rare or multigenic diseases   
- Types of biological material  
- Molecular basis of disease  
- Drug development  
- Population Statistics and predictive modelling (?)  
- Big Data  
- Data integration  
	- GWAS benefits and harms?  

[See 2013 paper on big ideas in biofx](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3615659/)  

## Issues or Debates  
- What do we study? (DNA/RNA/Methylation etc)  
- What is 'junk DNA' ([ENCODE debate](https://www.nature.com/articles/509137e))  
- Who is a bioinformatician? [Stakeholders paper, 2004](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2047326/)  
- What can the genome tell us? When is it 'too dangerous' to allow that data to be in the public domain?  
- Access to findings from bioinformatics projects  
	- Generation of, and access to publically available data  

## Problems or Challenges  
- Tissue Heterogeneity  
- Technical artefacts  
	- What is the meaning of a 'gold standard' analytical pipeline in bioinformatics  
- Translating research into the clinic  
	- What counts as substantial proof of a new discovery in bioinformatics?  

## Processes  
- Literature Review  
- Connecting Ideas  
- Integrating themes  

## Theories  
- High resolution molecular data can answer all our questions about life  
	- Lol, too controversial?  

## Paradoxes  
- Does bioinformatics yield hypotheses or do hypotheses propell bioinformatics research?  

## Assumptions or Perspectives  
- WGS is more relevant than WXS  
- [abc methodology] is outdated (are they? What can we get out of them?)   
- [xxx] approach is the best assembly method (or other strongly prevalent computational approaches in subtopics)  

# Concept maps for these ideas  

